---
layout: single
category: command
author_profile: false
excerpt: ""
title: iff
tags:
comments: true
date: '2016-09-17'
sidebar:
  nav: "commands"
---

Images:mini-category.gif  [!Logic constraints], [!Mixed-integer based nonlinear operators]

### Syntax

````matlab
F = iff(A,B)
````

### Examples

[iff] is used to define logic equivalence. As an example, the following code will ensure that a variable '''x''' satisfies a set of inequalities if and only if a binary variable '''d''' is true, and vice versa.
````matlabb
d = binvar(1);
F = iff(d,A*x <= b);
````

[iff] is mainly intended for (BINARY <-> BINARY), although it can be used also for more general constructions (bearing in mind that these models typically are numerically sensitive and may require a lot of binary variables to be modeled).

The following code constrains a variable '''y''' if and only if a set of constraints on '''x''' hold.
````matlabb
F = iff(A*x <= b, A*y <=y);
````

The following code is equivalent
````matlabb
d = binvar(1,1);
F = iff(A*x <= b, d);
F = iff(A*y <= b, d);
````

[iff] is overloaded as == on constraints, hence the following code gives the same model.
````matlabb
F = [(A*x <= b) == (A*y <= b)];
````

So does the following model
[iff] is overloaded as == on constraints, hence the following code gives the same model.
````matlabb
binvar d
F = [d == (A*x <= b), d == (A*y <= b)];
````

For more examples, see the [Tutorials.LogicProgramming logic programming tutorial].

### Comments
Since [iff] is implemented using a [tutorials.Big-M big-M] approach, it is crucial that all involved variables have explicit bound constraints.

[iff] is very sensitive to modelling choices (is 10'^-5^' really a positive number?), so it should be avoided as much as possible. If you can rewrite your model to simple (BINARY-> Linear) [implies implication constraints], do so!
