---
layout: single
category: command
author_profile: false
excerpt: ""
title: dilate
tags:
comments: true
date: '2016-09-17'
sidebar:
  nav: "commands"
---

[dilate] is used to derive affine dilations for polynomially parametrized uncertain SDPs. The dilated constraint can then be used for conservatively solving robust SDP with polytopic uncertainty.

### Syntax

````matlab
Fdilated = dilate(F,w)
[G,H,M] = dilate(X,w)
````

### Examples

The [tutorials.robustOptimization robust SDP framework] in YALMIP allows SDP constraints with affine dependence on the uncertainty, and a polytopic uncertainty description. However, it is not uncommon that the dependence with respect to the uncertainty is polynomial.

A recent approach to address this is [ http://www.keisu.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp/Research/METR/2006/METR06-10.pdf matrix dilations], where the polynomial dependence is reduced to an affine dependence, at the cost of a larger SDP and possible conservatism. Note that the implementation in YALMIP uses a slightly [http://www.control.isy.liu.se/publications/doc?id=1879 alternative approach].

Consider the problem of finding an upper bound on a polynomial '''f''' in the range 0 to 1 (this example is taken from the reference above)
````matlabb
sdpvar t1 t2
f = -375*t1^4 + 800*t1^3-570*t1^2+144*t1-375*t2^4 + 800*t2^3-570*t2^2+144*t2
````

This can be formulated as a robustness problem; find the smallest possible '''x''' such that '''x-f''' is positive on the region of interest.

The expression '''x-f''' is not affine in the uncertainty '''t1''' and '''t2''', hence the standard robust framework in YALMIP is not applicable. To get a robustness problem with affine dependence, we dilate the constraint

````matlabb
sdpvar x
Fdilated = dilate(x-f>=0,[t1 t2])
````

The dilated constraint is affine in the uncertainty, and we can apply standard robust programming.
````matlabb
F = [Fdilated, uncertain([t1 t2]), 0 <= [t1 t2] <= 1];
optimize(F,x)
````

The command can alternatively be called with an [sdpvar] object instead of a [set] object. The output arguments are then the matrices used in the dilation. The code above is equivalent to the following

````matlabb
[G,H,M] = dilate(x-f,[t1 t2])
W = sdpvar(size(G,1),size(H,2))
F = [G + W*H' + H*W' >= 0, uncertain([t1 t2]), 0 <= [t1 t2] <= 1]
optimize(F,x)
````

### See also
[uncertain], [robustify], [optimize], [solvesos], [Tutorials.RobustOptimization robust optimization tutorial], [Examples.RobustMPC robust MPC example], [Examples.LPV Robust SDP example]
