---
layout: single
category: command
author_profile: false
excerpt: ""
title: sdpfun
tags:
comments: true
date: '2016-09-17'
sidebar:
  nav: "commands"
---

Images:mini-category.gif  [!Evaluation-based nonlinear operators]

### Syntax


````matlab
y = sdpfun(arg1,arg2,...,argn,'function')
````

### Examples

General nonlinear functions are supported through the
[Tutorials.NonlinearOperators#evaluationbased evaluation based nonlinear operator framework]. Most functions (exponentials, logarithms, trigonometric, etc.) are defined by default, but the user can use [sdpfun] to define other (element-wise) functions, without going through the hassle of creating new files (although that is the preferred approach).

The following example shows how we can use a nonlinear solver to find a local optimizer to a small trigonometric problem ('''sin''' is actually already overloaded, but we do it here again for illustrative purposes).
````matlabb
sdpvar x
y = sdpfun(10*x,'sin')
optimize([-pi <= x <= pi],y+abs(x))
````

Nonlinear operators defined using the [sdpfun] command can be used in the global solver [Solvers.BMIBNB bmibnb]. Performance is poor though, since the bounding procedures have to be done ad-hoc.
````matlabb
sdpvar x
y = sdpfun(10*x,'sin')
optimize([-pi <= x <= pi],y+abs(x),sdpsettings('solver','bmibnb'))
````

By using function handles, we can redefine functions (they will still work correctly on doubles)
````matlabb
sdpvar x
sin = @(x) sdpfun(x,'sin');
optimize([-pi <= x <= pi],sin(10*x)+abs(sin(x))+x,sdpsettings('solver','bmibnb'));
value(x)

t = (-pi:0.01:pi);
plot(t,sin(10*t)+abs(sin(t))+t)
hold on;
plot(value(x),value(sin(10*x)+abs(sin(x))+x),'r+')
````

Anonymous functions can be also in the function definition.
````matlabb
clear sin % To avoid aby problems from code above
sdpvar x
strange = @(x) sdpfun(x,'@(x) sin(10*x)+abs(sin(x))+x');
optimize([-pi <= x <= pi],strange(x),sdpsettings('solver','bmibnb'));
value(x)
````

Notice that there is an important difference between this model, and the model where only '''sin''' was defined.  When only '''sin''' is defined, the solver will work with 3 variables to describe the objective; callback variables to evaluate '''sin(x)''' and '''sin(10*x)''', and a third variable to model absolute values. When the anonymous functions is used, there will only be one callback variable in the objective. In other words, the '''sin''' and absolute value operator will never be applied on a symbolic [Commands.sdpvar sdpvar] variable, but only on numerical values of '''x''' along the solution process.

The command can be useful for redefining how some functions are implemented. As an example, if '''abs''' is used in a nonconvex way in YALMIP, it is modeled using a mixed-integer representation. If you instead want to solve the nonconvex problem by simply treating '''abs''' as a general (non-smooth) nonlinear function, simply redefine it as a anonymous function.

The following problem will be solved as a mixed-integer linear program since YALMIP detects that the absolute value is used in a nonconvex way and thus implements a mixed integer description.
````matlabb
sdpvar y
constraints = [-5 <= y <= 5, abs(y-2)>=1];
optimize(constraints,y)
````

The following alternative will be solved as a general nonlinear program since YALMIPs implementation of the abs operator will be avoided.

````matlabb
sdpvar y
abs = @(x) sdpfun(x,'@(x) abs(x)');
constraints = [-5 <= y <= 5, abs(y-2)>=1];
optimize(constraints,y)
clear abs
````

### Comments

Note that these functions should be used with care in the global solver [Solvers.BMIBNB BMIBNB]. The reason is that the global solver needs bounding functions etc for performance (and correctness). Since these are missing (they are approximated by sampling the function along its domain), the global solver is not guaranteed to work.  If you really need a new nonlinear operator to be strictly supported in [Solvers.BMIBNB bmibnb] (i.e. with an optimized bounding strategy), make a feature request.

Also note that no convexity structure is communicated to YALMIP if you use this way to define nonlinear operators.
