---
title: "BMIBNB"
category: solver
layout: single-solver
author_profile: false
tags: [Global solver, Nonconvex quadratic programming solver, Bilinear matrix inequality, BMIBNB,Mixed-integer nonlinear nonconvex programming solver]
excerpt: "Built-in solver for nonconvex problems"
developer: "J. Löfberg"
sidebar:
  nav: "solvers"
---

BMIBNB is an implementation of a standard branch & bound algorithm for nonconvex problems, based on [(most often) linear programming relaxations and convex envelope approximations](/tutorial/envelopesinbmibnb). The [tutorial about global optimization](tutorial/globaloptimization) focus on applications of the solver.

The solver relies on external linear, quadratic and semidefinite programming solvers for solving the lower bounding relaxation problems, and nonlinear solvers for the upper bound computations.

Most important options (-1 means adaptive choice, 0 is off and 1 on)
 <table border="1" cellspacing="1" style="border-collapse: collapse" width="100%" bordercolor="#000000" bgcolor="#FFFFFF" id="table1">       
        <tr>
          <td width="310"><code>sdpsettings('bmibnb.lowersolver', solvertag)</code></td>
          <td>Solver for relaxed problems.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td width="310"><code>sdpsettings('bmibnb.uppersolver', solvertag)</code></td>
          <td>Local solver for computing upper bounds.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td width="310"><code>sdpsettings('bmibnb.lpsolver', solvertag)</code></td>
          <td>LP solver for bound strengthening
			(only used if <code>bmibnb.lpreduce</code> is set to 1)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td width="310"><code>sdpsettings('bmibnb.numglobal', [int](/command/int))</code></td>
          <td>A major computational burden along the branching process is to
			solve the upper bound problems using a local nonlinear solver. By
			setting this value to a finite value, the local solver will no
			longer be used when the upper bound has been improved <code>numglobal</code> times.
			This option is useful if you believe your local solver quickly gives
			globally optimal solutions. It can also be useful if you have a
			feasible solution and just want to compute a gap. In this case, use
			the <code>usex0</code> option and set <code>numglobal</code> to 0.</td>
        </tr>
   <tr>
          <td width="310"><code>sdpsettings('bmibnb.roottight',[-1|0|1])</code></td>
          <td>Improve variable bounds at root-node by performing bound
			strengthening based on the full relaxed model (Can be very expensive,
			but lead to improved branching)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td width="310"><code>sdpsettings('bmibnb.lpreduce',[-1|0|1])</code></td>
          <td>Improve variable bounds in all nodes by performing bound
			strengthening using only the scalar constraints (including scalar cut
			constraints) in the model (Can be very expensive, but lead to
			improved branching)</td>
        </tr>
        </table>
